The fantasy always runs like this: A team of us has fought our way into his 
secret bunker. Okay, it’s a fantasy, let’s go whole hog. I’ve single- 
handedly neutralized his elite guard and have burst into his bunker, my 
Browning machine gun at the ready. He lunges for his Luger; I knock it out of 
his hand. He lunges for the cyanide pill he keeps to commit suicide rather than 
be captured. I knock that out of his hand as well. He snarls in rage, attacks with 
otherworldly strength. We grapple; I manage to gain the upper hand and pin him 
down and handcuff him. “Adolf Hitler,” I announce, “I arrest you for crimes 
against humanity.” 

And this is where the medal-of-honor version of the fantasy ends and the 
imagery darkens. What would I do with Hitler? The viscera become so raw that I 
switch to passive voice in my mind, to get some distance. What should be done 
with Hitler? It’s easy to imagine, once I allow myself. Sever his spine at the 
neck, leave him paralyzed but with sensation. Take out his eyes with a blunt 
instrument. Puncture his eardrums, rip out his tongue. Keep him alive, tube-fed, 
on a respirator. Immobile, unable to speak, to see, to hear, only able to feel. Then 
inject him with something that will give him a cancer that festers and pustulates 
in every corner of his body, that will grow and grow until every one of his cells 
shrieks with agony, till every moment feels like an infinity spent in the fires of 
hell. That’s what should be done with Hitler. That’s what I would want done to 
Hitler. That’s what I would do to Hitler. 


I’ve had versions of this fantasy since I was a kid. Still do at times. And when I 
really immerse myself in it, my heart rate quickens, I flush, my fists clench. All 
those plans for Hitler, the most evil person in history, the soul most deserving of 
punishment. 



But there is a big problem. I don’t believe in souls or evil, think that the word 
“wicked” is most pertinent to a musical, and doubt that punishment should be 
relevant to criminal justice. But there’s a problem with that, in turn—I sure feel 
like some people should be put to death, yet I oppose the death penalty. I’ve 
enjoyed plenty of violent, schlocky movies, despite being in favor of strict gun 
control. And I sure had fun when, at some kid’s birthday party and against 
various unformed principles in my mind, I played laser tag, shooting at strangers 
from hiding places (fun, that is, until some pimply kid zapped me, like, a million 
times and then snickered at me, which made me feel insecure and unmanly). Yet 
at the same time, I know most of the lyrics to “Down by the Riverside” (“ain’t 
gonna study war no more”) plus when you’re supposed to clap your hands. 

In other words, I have a confused array of feelings and thoughts about 
violence, aggression, and competition. Just like most humans. 

To preach from an obvious soapbox, our species has problems with violence. 
We have the means to create thousands of mushroom clouds; shower heads and 
subway ventilation systems have carried poison gas, letters have carried anthrax, 
passenger planes have become weapons; mass rapes can constitute a military 
strategy; bombs go off in markets, schoolchildren with guns massacre other 
children; there are neighborhoods where everyone from pizza delivery guys to 
firefighters fears for their safety. And there are the subtler versions of violence— 
say, a childhood of growing up abused, or the effects on a minority people when 
the symbols of the majority shout domination and menace. We are always 
shadowed by the threat of other humans harming us. 

If that were solely the way things are, violence would be an easy problem to 
approach intellectually. AIDS—unambiguously bad news—eradicate. 
Alzheimer’s disease—same thing. Schizophrenia, cancer, malnutrition, flesh¬ 
eating bacteria, global warming, comets hitting earth—ditto. 

The problem, though, is that violence doesn’t go on that list. Sometimes we 
have no problem with it at all. 

This is a central point of this book—we don’t hate violence. We hate and fear 
the wrong kind of violence, violence in the wrong context. Because violence in 
the right context is different. We pay good money to watch it in a stadium, we 
teach our kids to fight back, we feel proud when, in creaky middle age, we 
manage a dirty hip-check in a weekend basketball game. Our conversations are 
filled with military metaphors—we rally the troops after our ideas get shot 
down. Our sports teams’ names celebrate violence—Warriors, Vikings, Lions, 
Tigers, and Bears. We even think this way about something as cerebral as chess 



—“Kasparov kept pressing for a murderous attack. Toward the end, Kasparov 
had to oppose threats of violence with more of the same.’- We build theologies 
around violence, elect leaders who excel at it, and in the case of so many 
women, preferentially mate with champions of human combat. When it’s the 
“right” type of aggression, we love it. 

It is the ambiguity of violence, that we can pull a trigger as an act of hideous 
aggression or of self-sacrificing love, that is so challenging. As a result, violence 
will always be a part of the human experience that is profoundly hard to 
understand. 

This book explores the biology of violence, aggression, and competition— 
the behaviors and the impulses behind them, the acts of individuals, groups, and 
states, and when these are bad or good things. It is a book about the ways in 
which humans harm one another. But it is also a book about the ways in which 
people do the opposite. What does biology teach us about cooperation, 
affiliation, reconciliation, empathy, and altruism? 

The book has a number of personal roots. One is that, having had blessedly 
little personal exposure to violence in my life, the entire phenomenon scares the 
crap out of me. I think like an academic egghead, believing that if I write enough 
paragraphs about a scary subject, give enough lectures about it, it will give up 
and go away quietly. And if everyone took enough classes about the biology of 
violence and studied hard, we’d all be able to take a nap between the snoozing 
lion and lamb. Such is the delusional sense of efficacy of a professor. 

Then there’s the other personal root for this book. I am by nature majorly 
pessimistic. Give me any topic and I’ll find a way in which things will fall apart. 
Or turn out wonderfully and somehow, because of that, be poignant and sad. It’s 
a pain in the butt, especially to people stuck around me. And when I had kids, I 
realized that I needed to get ahold of this tendency big time. So I looked for 
evidence that things weren’t quite that bad. I started small, practicing on them— 
don’t cry, a T. rex would never come and eat you; of course Nemo’s daddy will 
find him. And as I’ve learned more about the subject of this book, there’s been 
an unexpected realization—the realms of humans harming one another are 
neither universal nor inevitable, and we’re getting some scientific insights into 
how to avoid them. My pessimistic self has a hard time admitting this, but there 
is room for optimism. 


THE APPROACH IN THIS BOOK 


make my living as a combination neurobiologist—someone who studies the 
brain—and primatologist—someone who studies monkeys and apes. Therefore, 
this is a book that is rooted in science, specifically biology. And out of that come 
three key points. First, you can’t begin to understand things like aggression, 
competition, cooperation, and empathy without biology; I say this for the benefit 
of a certain breed of social scientist who finds biology to be irrelevant and a bit 
ideologically suspect when thinking about human social behavior. But just as 
important, second, you’re just as much up the creek if you rely only on biology; 
this is said for the benefit of a style of molecular fundamentalist who believes 
that the social sciences are destined to be consumed by “real” science. And as a 
third point, by the time you finish this book, you’ll see that it actually makes no 
sense to distinguish between aspects of a behavior that are “biological” and those 
that would be described as, say, “psychological” or “cultural.” Utterly 
intertwined. 

Understanding the biology of these human behaviors is obviously important. 
But unfortunately it is hellishly complicated . 2 Now, if you were interested in the 
biology of, say, how migrating birds navigate, or in the mating reflex that occurs 
in female hamsters when they’re ovulating, this would be an easier task. But 
that’s not what we’re interested in. Instead, it’s human behavior, human social 
behavior, and in many cases abnormal human social behavior. And it is indeed a 
mess, a subject involving brain chemistry, hormones, sensory cues, prenatal 
environment, early experience, genes, both biological and cultural evolution, and 
ecological pressures, among other things. 

How are we supposed to make sense of all these factors in thinking about 
behavior? We tend to use a certain cognitive strategy when dealing with 
complex, multifaceted phenomena, in that we break down those separate facets 
into categories, into buckets of explanation. Suppose there’s a rooster standing 
next to you, and there’s a chicken across the street. The rooster gives a sexually 
solicitive gesture that is hot by chicken standards, and she promptly runs over to 
mate with him (I haven’t a clue if this is how it works, but let’s just suppose). 
And thus we have a key behavioral biological question—why did the chicken 


cross the road? And if you’re a psychoneuroendocrinologist, your answer would 
be “Because circulating estrogen levels in that chicken worked in a certain part 
of her brain to make her responsive to this male signaling,” and if you’re a 
bioengineer, the answer would be “Because the long bone in the leg of the 
chicken forms a fulcrum for her pelvis (or some such thing), allowing her to 
move forward rapidly,” and if you’re an evolutionary biologist, you’d say, 
“Because over the course of millions of years, chickens that responded to such 
gestures at a time that they were fertile left more copies of their genes, and thus 
this is now an innate behavior in chickens,” and so on, thinking in categories, in 
differing scientific disciplines of explanation. 

The goal of this book is to avoid such categorical thinking. Putting facts into 
nice cleanly demarcated buckets of explanation has its advantages—for example, 
it can help you remember facts better. But it can wreak havoc on your ability to 
think about those facts. This is because the boundaries between different 
categories are often arbitrary, but once some arbitrary boundary exists, we forget 
that it is arbitrary and get way too impressed with its importance. For example, 
the visual spectrum is a continuum of wavelengths from violet to red, and it is 
arbitrary where boundaries are put for different color names (for example, where 
we see a transition from “blue” to “green”); as proof of this, different languages 
arbitrarily split up the visual spectrum at different points in coming up with the 
words for different colors. Show someone two roughly similar colors. If the 
color-name boundary in that person’s language happens to fall between the two 
colors, the person will overestimate the difference between the two. If the colors 
fall in the same category, the opposite happens. In other words, when you think 
categorically, you have trouble seeing how similar or different two things are. If 
you pay lots of attention to where boundaries are, you pay less attention to 
complete pictures. 

Thus, the official intellectual goal of this book is to avoid using categorical 
buckets when thinking about the biology of some of our most complicated 
behaviors, even more complicated than chickens crossing roads. 

What’s the replacement? 

A behavior has just occurred. Why did it happen? Your first category of 
explanation is going to be a neurobiological one. What went on in that person’s 
brain a second before the behavior happened? Now pull out to a slightly larger 
field of vision, your next category of explanation, a little earlier in time. What 
sight, sound, or smell in the previous seconds to minutes triggered the nervous 
system to produce that behavior? On to the next explanatory category. What 



hormones acted hours to days earlier to change how responsive that individual 
was to the sensory stimuli that trigger the nervous system to produce the 
behavior? And by now you’ve increased your field of vision to be thinking about 
neurobiology and the sensory world of our environment and short-term 
endocrinology in trying to explain what happened. 

And you just keep expanding. What features of the environment in the prior 
weeks to years changed the structure and function of that person’s brain and thus 
changed how it responded to those hormones and environmental stimuli? Then 
you go further back to the childhood of the individual, their fetal environment, 
then their genetic makeup. And then you increase the view to encompass factors 
larger than that one individual—how has culture shaped the behavior of people 
living in that individual’s group?—what ecological factors helped shape that 
culture—expanding and expanding until considering events umpteen millennia 
ago and the evolution of that behavior. 

Okay, so this represents an improvement—it seems like instead of trying to 
explain all of behavior with a single discipline (e.g., “Everything can be 
explained with knowledge about this particular [take your pick:] 
hormone/gene/childhood event”), we’ll be thinking about a bunch of disciplinary 
buckets. But something subtler will be done, and this is the most important idea 
in the book: when you explain a behavior with one of these disciplines, you are 
implicitly invoking all the disciplines—any given type of explanation is the end 
product of the influences that preceded it. It has to work this way. If you say, 
“The behavior occurred because of the release of neurochemical Y in the brain,” 
you are also saying, “The behavior occurred because the heavy secretion of 
hormone X this morning increased the levels of neurochemical Y.” You’re also 
saying, “The behavior occurred because the environment in which that person 
was raised made her brain more likely to release neurochemical Y in response to 
certain types of stimuli.” And you’re also saying, “. . . because of the gene that 
codes for the particular version of neurochemical Y.” And if you’ve so much as 
whispered the word “gene,” you’re also saying, “. . . and because of the 
millennia of factors that shaped the evolution of that particular gene.” And so on. 

There are not different disciplinary buckets. Instead, each one is the end 
product of all the biological influences that came before it and will influence all 
the factors that follow it. Thus, it is impossible to conclude that a behavior is 
caused by a gene, a hormone, a childhood trauma, because the second you 
invoke one type of explanation, you are de facto invoking them all. No buckets. 
A “neurobiological” or “genetic” or “developmental” explanation for a behavior 



is just shorthand, an expository convenience for temporarily approaching the 
whole multifactorial arc from a particular perspective. 

Pretty impressive, huh? Actually, maybe not. Maybe I’m just pretentiously 
saying, “You have to think complexly about complex things.” Wow, what a 
revelation. And maybe what I’ve been tacitly setting up is this full-of-ourselves 
straw man of “Ooh, we’re going to think subtly. We won’t get suckered into 
simplistic answers, not like those chicken-crossing-the-road neurochemists and 
chicken evolutionary biologists and chicken psychoanalysts, all living in their 
own limited categorical buckets.” 

Obviously, scientists aren’t like that. They’re smart. They understand that 
they need to take lots of angles into account. Of necessity, their research may 
focus on a narrow subject, because there are limits to how much one person can 
obsess over. But of course they know that their particular categorical bucket isn’t 
the whole story. 

Maybe yes, maybe no. Consider the following quotes from some card- 
carrying scientists. The first: 

Give me a dozen healthy infants, well formed, and my own specified 
world to bring them up in and I’ll guarantee to take any one at random 
and train him to become any type of specialist I might select—doctor, 
lawyer, artist, merchant-chief and yes, even beggar-man thief, regardless 
of his talents, penchants, tendencies, abilities, vocations, and race of his 
ancestors .- 

This was John Watson, a founder of behaviorism, writing around 1925. 
Behaviorism, with its notion that behavior is completely malleable, that it can be 
shaped into anything in the right environment, dominated American psychology 
in the midtwentieth century; we’ll return to behaviorism, and its considerable 
limitations. The point is that Watson was pathologically caught inside a bucket 
having to do with the environmental influences on development. “I’ll 
guarantee ... to train him to become any type.” Yet we are not all born the same, 
with the same potential, regardless of how we are trained.* 4 
The next quote: 

Normal psychic life depends upon the good functioning of brain 
synapses, and mental disorders appear as a result of synaptic 


derangements. ... It is necessary to alter these synaptic adjustments and 
change the paths chosen by the impulses in their constant passage so as to 
modify the corresponding ideas and force thought into different 
channels.- 

Alter synaptic adjustments. Sounds delicate. Yeah, right. These were the 
words of the Portuguese neurologist Egas Moniz, around the time he was 
awarded the Nobel Prize in 1949 for his development of frontal leukotomies. 
Here was an individual pathologically stuck in a bucket having to do with a 
crude version of the nervous system. Just tweak those microscopic synapses with 
a big ol’ ice pick (as was done once leukotomies, later renamed frontal 
lobotomies, became an assembly line operation). 

And a final quote: 

The immensely high reproduction rate in the moral imbecile has long 
been established. . . . Socially inferior human material is enabled ... to 
penetrate and finally to annihilate the healthy nation. The selection for 
toughness, heroism, social utility . . . must be accomplished by some 
human institution if mankind, in default of selective factors, is not to be 
mined by domestication-induced degeneracy. The racial idea as the basis 
of our state has already accomplished much in this respect. We must— 
and should—rely on the healthy feelings of our Best and charge them . . . 
with the extermination of elements of the population loaded with dregs. - 

This was Konrad Lorenz, animal behaviorist, Nobel laureate, cofounder of 
the field of ethology (stay tuned), regular on nature TV programs. 2 
Grandfatherly Konrad, in his Austrian shorts and suspenders, being followed by 
his imprinted baby geese, was also a rabid Nazi propagandist. Lorenz joined the 
Nazi Party the instant Austrians were eligible, and joined the party’s Office of 
Race Policy, working to psychologically screen Poles of mixed Polish/German 
parentage, helping to determine which were sufficiently Germanized to be 
spared death. Here was a man pathologically mired in an imaginary bucket 
related to gross misinterpretations of what genes do. 

These were not obscure scientists producing fifth-rate science at Podunk U. 
These were among the most influential scientists of the twentieth century. They 
helped shape who and how we educate and our views on what social ills are 


fixable and when we shouldn’t bother. They enabled the destruction of the brains 
of people against their will. And they helped implement final solutions for 
problems that didn’t exist. It can be far more than a mere academic matter when 
a scientist thinks that human behavior can be entirely explained from only one 
perspective. 



OUR LIVES AS ANIMALS AND OUR HUMAN 
VERSATILITY AT BEING AGGRESSIVE 


S o we have a first intellectual challenge, which is to always think in this 
interdisciplinary way. The second challenge is to make sense of humans as 
apes, primates, mammals. Oh, that’s right, we’re a kind of animal. And it will be 
a challenge to figure out when we’re just like other animals and when we are 
utterly different. 

Some of the time we are indeed just like any other animal. When we’re 
scared, we secrete the same hormone as would some subordinate fish getting 
hassled by a bully. The biology of pleasure involves the same brain chemicals in 
us as in a capybara. Neurons from humans and brine shrimp work the same way. 
House two female rats together, and over the course of weeks they will 
synchronize their reproductive cycles so that they wind up ovulating within a 
few hours of each other. Try the same with two human females (as reported in 
some but not all studies), and something similar occurs. It’s called the Wellesley 
effect, first shown with roommates at all-women’s Wellesley College.- And 
when it comes to violence, we can be just like some other apes—we pummel, we 
cudgel, we throw rocks, we kill with our bare hands. 

So some of the time an intellectual challenge is to assimilate how similar we 
can be to other species. In other cases the challenge is to appreciate how, though 
human physiology resembles that of other species, we use the physiology in 
novel ways. We activate the classical physiology of vigilance while watching a 
scary movie. We activate a stress response when thinking about mortality. We 
secrete hormones related to nurturing and social bonding, but in response to an 
adorable baby panda. And this certainly applies to aggression—we use the same 
muscles as does a male chimp attacking a sexual competitor, but we use them to 
harm someone because of their ideology. 

Finally, sometimes the only way to understand our humanness is to consider 
solely humans, because the things we do are unique. While a few other species 
have regular nonreproductive sex, we’re the only ones to talk afterward about 
how it was. We construct cultures premised on beliefs concerning the nature of 
life and can transmit those beliefs multigenerationally, even between two 


individuals separated by millennia—just consider that perennial best seller, the 
Bible. Consonant with that, we can harm by doing things as unprecedented as 
and no more physically taxing than pulling a trigger, or nodding consent, or 
looking the other way. We can be passive-aggressive, damn with faint praise, cut 
with scorn, express contempt with patronizing concern. All species are unique, 
but we are unique in some pretty unique ways. 

Here are two examples of just how strange and unique humans can be when 
they go about harming one another and caring for one another. The first example 
involves, well, my wife. So we’re in the minivan, our kids in the back, my wife 
driving. And this complete jerk cuts us off, almost causing an accident, and in a 
way that makes it clear that it wasn’t distractedness on his part, just sheer 
selfishness. My wife honks at him, and he flips us off. We’re livid, incensed. 
Asshole-where’s-the-cops-when-you-need-them, etc. And suddenly my wife 
announces that we’re going to follow him, make him a little nervous. I’m still 
furious, but this doesn’t strike me as the most prudent thing in the world. 
Nonetheless, my wife starts trailing him, right on his rear. 

After a few minutes the guy’s driving evasively, but my wife’s on him. 
Finally both cars stop at a red light, one that we know is a long one. Another car 
is stopped in front of the villain. He’s not going anywhere. Suddenly my wife 
grabs something from the front seat divider, opens her door, and says, “Now he’s 
going to be sorry.” I rouse myself feebly—“Uh, honey, do you really think this is 
such a goo—” But she’s out of the car, starts pounding on his window. I hurry 
over just in time to hear my wife say, “If you could do something that mean to 
another person, you probably need this,” in a venomous voice. She then flings 
something in the window. She returns to the car triumphant, just glorious. 

“What did you throw in there!?” 

She’s not talking yet. The light turns green, there’s no one behind us, and we 
just sit there. The thug’s car starts to blink a very sensible turn indicator, makes a 
slow turn, and heads down a side street into the dark at, like, five miles an hour. 
If it’s possible for a car to look ashamed, this car was doing it. 

“Honey, what did you throw in there, tell me?” 

She allows herself a small, malicious grin. 

“A grape lollipop.” I was awed by her savage passive-aggressiveness 
—“You’re such a mean, awful human that something must have gone really 
wrong in your childhood, and maybe this lollipop will help correct that just a 
little.” That guy was going to think twice before screwing with us again. I 
swelled with pride and love. 



And the second example: In the mid-1960s, a rightist military coup 
overthrew the government of Indonesia, instituting the thirty-year dictatorship of 
Suharto known as the New Order. Following the coup, government-sponsored 
purges of communists, leftists, intellectuals, unionists, and ethnic Chinese left 
about a half million dead. 2 Mass executions, torture, villages torched with 
inhabitants trapped inside. V. S. Naipaul, in his book Among the Believers: An 
Islamic Journey, describes hearing rumors while in Indonesia that when a 
paramilitary group would arrive to exterminate every person in some village, 
they would, incongruously, bring along a traditional gamelan orchestra. 
Eventually Naipaul encountered an unrepentant veteran of a massacre, and he 
asked him about the rumor. Yes, it is true. We would bring along gamelan 
musicians, singers, flutes, gongs, the whole shebang. Why? Why would you 
possibly do that? The man looked puzzled and gave what seemed to him a self- 
evident answer: “Well, to make it more beautiful.” 

Bamboo flutes, burning villages, the lollipop ballistics of maternal love. We 
have our work cut out for us, trying to understand the virtuosity with which we 
humans harm or care for one another, and how deeply intertwined the biology of 
the two can be. 


One 


The Behavior 


W e have our strategy in place. A behavior has occurred—one that is 

reprehensible, or wonderful, or floating ambiguously in between. What 
occurred in the prior second that triggered the behavior? This is the province of 
the nervous system. What occurred in the prior seconds to minutes that triggered 
the nervous system to produce that behavior? This is the world of sensory 
stimuli, much of it sensed unconsciously. What occurred in the prior hours to 
days to change the sensitivity of the nervous system to such stimuli? Acute 
actions of hormones. And so on, all the way back to the evolutionary pressures 
played out over the prior millions of years that started the ball rolling. 

So we’re set. Except that when approaching this big sprawling mess of a 
subject, it is kind of incumbent upon you to first define your terms. Which is an 
unwelcome prospect. 

Here are some words of central importance to this book: aggression, 
violence, compassion, empathy, sympathy, competition, cooperation, altruism, 
envy, schadenfreude, spite, forgiveness, reconciliation, revenge, reciprocity, and 
(why not?) love. Flinging us into definitional quagmires. 

Why the difficulty? As emphasized in the introduction, one reason is that so 
many of these terms are the subject of ideological battles over the appropriation 
and distortions of their meanings.*- Words pack power and these definitions are 
laden with values, often wildly idiosyncratic ones. Here’s an example, namely 
the ways I think about the word “competition”: (a) “competition”—your lab 
team races the Cambridge group to a discovery (exhilarating but embarrassing to 
admit to); (b) “competition”—playing pickup soccer (fine, as long as the best 
player shifts sides if the score becomes lopsided); (c) “competition”—your 
child’s teacher announces a prize for the best outlining-your-fingers 


Thanksgiving turkey drawing (silly and perhaps a red flag—if it keeps 
happening, maybe complain to the principal); (d) “competition”—whose deity is 
more worth killing for? (try to avoid). 

But the biggest reason for the definitional challenge was emphasized in the 
introduction—these terms mean different things to scientists living inside 
different disciplines. Is “aggression” about thought, emotion, or something done 
with muscles? Is “altruism” something that can be studied mathematically in 
various species, including bacteria, or are we discussing moral development in 
kids? And implicit in these different perspectives, disciplines have differing 
tendencies toward lumping and splitting—these scientists believe that behavior 
X consists of two different subtypes, whereas those scientists think it comes in 
seventeen flavors. 

Let’s examine this with respect to different types of “aggression.”- Animal 
behaviorists dichotomize between offensive and defensive aggression, 
distinguishing between, say, the intruder and the resident of a territory; the 
biology underlying these two versions differs. Such scientists also distinguish 
between conspecific aggression (between members of the same species) and 
fighting off a predator. Meanwhile, criminologists distinguish between impulsive 
and premeditated aggression. Anthropologists care about differing levels of 
organization underlying aggression, distinguishing among warfare, clan 
vendettas, and homicide. 

Moreover, various disciplines distinguish between aggression that occurs 
reactively (in response to provocation) and spontaneous aggression, as well as 
between hot-blooded, emotional aggression and cold-blooded, instrumental 
aggression (e.g., “I want your spot to build my nest, so scram or I’ll peck your 
eyes out; this isn’t personal, though”).- Then there’s another version of “This 
isn’t personal”—targeting someone just because they’re weak and you’re 
frustrated, stressed, or pained and need to displace some aggression. Such third- 
party aggression is ubiquitous—shock a rat and it’s likely to bite the smaller guy 
nearby; a beta-ranking male baboon loses a fight to the alpha, and he chases the 
omega male;* when unemployment rises, so do rates of domestic violence. 
Depressingly, as will be discussed in chapter 4, displacement aggression can 
decrease the perpetrator’s stress hormone levels; giving ulcers can help you 
avoid getting them. And of course there is the ghastly world of aggression that is 
neither reactive nor instrumental but is done for pleasure. 

Then there are specialized subtypes of aggression—maternal aggression, 
which often has a distinctive endocrinology. There’s the difference between 


aggression and ritualistic threats of aggression. For example, many primates 
have lower rates of actual aggression than of ritualized threats (such as 
displaying their canines). Similarly, aggression in Siamese fighting fish is mostly 
ritualistic.* 

Getting a definitional handle on the more positive terms isn’t easy either. 
There’s empathy versus sympathy, reconciliation versus forgiveness, and 
altruism versus “pathological altruism.”- For a psychologist the last term might 
describe the empathic codependency of enabling a partner’s drug use. For a 
neuroscientist it describes a consequence of a type of damage to the frontal 
cortex—in economic games of shifting strategies, individuals with such damage 
fail to switch to less altruistic play when being repeatedly stabbed in the back by 
the other player, despite being able to verbalize the other player’s strategy. 

When it comes to the more positive behaviors, the most pervasive issue is 
one that ultimately transcends semantics—does pure altruism actually exist? Can 
you ever separate doing good from the expectation of reciprocity, public acclaim, 
self-esteem, or the promise of paradise? 

This plays out in a fascinating realm, as reported in Larissa MacFarquhar’s 
2009 New Yorker piece “The Kindest Cut.”- It concerns people who donate 
organs not to family members or close friends but to strangers. An act of 
seemingly pure altmism. But these Samaritans unnerve everyone, sowing 
suspicion and skepticism. Is she expecting to get paid secretly for her kidney? Is 
she that desperate for attention? Will she work her way into the recipient’s life 
and do a Fatal Attraction ? What’s her deal? The piece suggests that these 
profound acts of goodness unnerve because of their detached, affectless nature. 

This speaks to an important point that runs through the book. As noted, we 
distinguish between hot-blooded and cold-blooded violence. We understand the 
former more, can see mitigating factors in it—consider the grieving, raging man 
who kills the killer of his child. And conversely, affectless violence seems 
horrifying and incomprehensible; this is the sociopathic contract killer, the 
Hannibal Lecter who kills without his heart rate nudging up a beat.*- It’s why 
cold-blooded killing is a damning descriptor. 

Similarly, we expect that our best, most prosocial acts be warmhearted, filled 
with positive affect. Cold-blooded goodness seems oxymoronic, is unsettling. I 
was once at a conference of neuroscientists and all-star Buddhist monk 
meditators, the former studying what the brains of the latter did during 
meditation. One scientist asked one of the monks whether he ever stops 
meditating because his knees hurt from all that cross-leggedness. He answered, 


“Sometimes I’ll stop sooner than I planned, but not because it hurts; it’s not 
something I notice. It’s as an act of kindness to my knees.” “Whoa,” I thought, 
“these guys are from another planet.” A cool, commendable one, but another 
planet nonetheless. Crimes of passion and good acts of passion make the most 
sense to us (nevertheless, as we shall see, dispassionate kindness often has much 
to recommend it). 

Hot-blooded badness, warmhearted goodness, and the unnerving incongruity 
of the cold-blooded versions raise a key point, encapsulated in a quote from Elie 
Wiesel, the Nobel Peace Prize winner and concentration camp survivor: “The 
opposite of love is not hate; its opposite is indifference.” The biologies of strong 
love and strong hate are similar in many ways, as we’ll see. 

Which reminds us that we don’t hate aggression; we hate the wrong kind of 
aggression but love it in the right context. And conversely, in the wrong context 
our most laudable behaviors are anything but. The motoric features of our 
behaviors are less important and challenging to understand than the meaning 
behind our muscles’ actions. 

This is shown in a subtle study.- Subjects in a brain scanner entered a virtual 
room where they encountered either an injured person in need of help or a 
menacing extraterrestrial; subjects could either bandage or shoot the individual. 
Pulling a trigger and applying a bandage are different behaviors. But they are 
similar, insofar as bandaging the injured person and shooting the alien are both 
the “right” things. And contemplating those two different versions of doing the 
right thing activated the same circuitry in the most context-sawy part of the 
brain, the prefrontal cortex. 

And thus those key terms that anchor this book are most difficult to define 
because of their profound context dependency. I will therefore group them in a 
way that reflects this. I won’t frame the behaviors to come as either pro- or 
antisocial—too cold-blooded for my expository tastes. Nor will they be labeled 
as “good” and “evil”—too hot-blooded and frothy. Instead, as our convenient 
shorthand for concepts that truly defy brevity, this book is about the biology of 
our best and worst behaviors. 


Two 


One Second Before 


V arious muscles have moved, and a behavior has happened. Perhaps it is a 
good act: you’ve empathically touched the arm of a suffering person. 
Perhaps it is a foul act: you’ve pulled a trigger, targeting an innocent person. 
Perhaps it is a good act: you’ve pulled a trigger, drawing fire to save others. 
Perhaps it is a foul act: you’ve touched the arm of someone, starting a chain of 
libidinal events that betray a loved one. Acts that, as emphasized, are definable 
only by context. 

Thus, to ask the question that will begin this and the next eight chapters, why 
did that behavior occur? 

As this book’s starting point, we know that different disciplines produce 
different answers—because of some hormone; because of evolution; because of 
childhood experiences or genes or culture—and as the book’s central premise, 
these are utterly intertwined answers, none standing alone. But on the most 
proximal level, in this chapter we ask: What happened one second before the 
behavior that caused it to occur? This puts us in the realm of neurobiology, of 
understanding the brain that commanded those muscles. 

This chapter is one of the book’s anchors. The brain is the final common 
pathway, the conduit that mediates the influences of all the distal factors to be 
covered in the chapters to come. What happened an hour, a decade, a million 
years earlier? What happened were factors that impacted the brain and the 
behavior it produced. 

This chapter has two major challenges. The first is its god-awful length. 
Apologies; I’ve tried to be succinct and nontechnical, but this is foundational 
material that needs to be covered. Second, regardless of how nontechnical I’ve 


tried to be, the material can overwhelm someone with no background in 
neuroscience. To help with that, please wade through appendix 1 around now. 


Now we ask: What crucial things happened in the second before that pro- or 
antisocial behavior occurred? Or, translated into neurobiology: What was going 
on with action potentials, neurotransmitters, and neural circuits in particular 
brain regions during that second? 



THREE METAPHORICAL (BUT NOT LITERAL) 
LAYERS 


W e start by considering the brain’s macroorganization, using a model 

proposed in the 1960s by the neuroscientist Paul MacLean.- His “triune 
brain” model conceptualizes the brain as having three functional domains: 

Layer l: An ancient part of the brain, at its base, found in species from humans 
to geckos. This layer mediates automatic, regulatory functions. If body 
temperature drops, this brain region senses it and commands muscles to shiver. If 
blood glucose levels plummet, that’s sensed here, generating hunger. If an injury 
occurs, a different loop initiates a stress response. 

Layer 2: A more recently evolved region that has expanded in mammals. 
MacLean conceptualized this layer as being about emotions, somewhat of a 
mammalian invention. If you see something gruesome and terrifying, this layer 
sends commands down to ancient layer 1, making you shiver with emotion. If 
you’re feeling sadly unloved, regions here prompt layer 1 to generate a craving 
for comfort food. If you’re a rodent and smell a cat, neurons here cause layer 1 
to initiate a stress response. 

Layer 3: The recently evolved layer of neocortex sitting on the upper surface 
of the brain. Proportionately, primates devote more of their brain to this layer 
than do other species. Cognition, memory storage, sensory processing, 
abstractions, philosophy, navel contemplation. Read a scary passage of a book, 
and layer 3 signals layer 2 to make you feel frightened, prompting layer 1 to 
initiate shivering. See an ad for Oreos and feel a craving—layer 3 influences 
layers 2 and 1. Contemplate the fact that loved ones won’t live forever, or kids in 
refugee camps, or how the Na’vis’ home tree was destroyed by those jerk 
humans in Avatar (despite the fact that, wait, Na’vi aren’t real!), and layer 3 
pulls layers 2 and 1 into the picture, and you feel sad and have the same sort of 
stress response that you’d have if you were fleeing a lion. 

Thus we’ve got the brain divided into three functional buckets, with the 
usual advantages and disadvantages of categorizing a continuum. The biggest 
disadvantage is how simplistic this is. For example: 


a. Anatomically there is considerable overlap among the three 
layers (for example, one part of the cortex can best be thought of 
as part of layer 2; stay tuned). 

b. The flow of information and commands is not just top down, 
from layer 3 to 2 to 1. A weird, great example explored in 
chapter 15: if someone is holding a cold drink (temperature is 
processed in layer 1), they’re more likely to judge someone they 
meet as having a cold personality (layer 3). 

c. Automatic aspects of behavior (simplistically, the purview of 
layer 1), emotion (layer 2), and thought (layer 3) are not 
separable. 

d. The triune model leads one, erroneously, to think that evolution 
in effect slapped on each new layer without any changes 
occurring in the one(s) already there. 

Despite these drawbacks, which MacLean himself emphasized, this model 
will be a good organizing metaphor for us.

THE LIMBIC SYSTEM 


T o make sense of our best and worst behaviors, automaticity, emotion, and 
cognition must all be considered; I arbitrarily start with layer 2 and its 
emphasis on emotion. 

Early-twentieth-century neuroscientists thought it obvious what layer 2 did. 
Take your standard-issue lab animal, a rat, and examine its brain. Right at the 
front would be these two gigantic lobes, the “olfactory bulbs” (one for each 
nostril), the primary receptive area for odors. 



Neuroscientists at the time asked what parts of the brain these gigantic rodent 
olfactory bulbs talked to (i.e., where they sent their axonal projections). Which 
brain regions were only a single synapse away from receiving olfactory 
information, which were two synapses, three, and so on? 

And it was layer 2 structures that received the first communiques. Ah, 
everyone concluded, this part of the brain must process odors, and so it was 
termed the rhinencephalon—the nose brain. 

Meanwhile, in the thirties and forties, neuroscientists such as the young 
MacLean, James Papez, Paul Bucy, and Heinrich Kliiver were starting to figure 
out what the layer 2 structures did. For example, if you lesion (i.e., destroy) layer 
2 structures, this produces “Kliiver-Bucy syndrome,” featuring abnormalities in 
sociality, especially in sexual and aggressive behaviors. They concluded that 




these structures, soon termed the “limbic system” (for obscure reasons), were 
about emotion. 

Rhinencephalon or limbic system? Olfaction or emotion? Pitched street 
battles ensued until someone pointed out the obvious—for a rat, emotion and 
olfaction are nearly synonymous, since nearly all the environmental stimuli that 
elicit emotions in a rodent are olfactory. Peace in our time. In a rodent, olfactory 
inputs are what the limbic system most depends on for emotional news of the 
world. In contrast, the primate limbic system is more informed by visual inputs. 

Limbic function is now recognized as central to the emotions that fuel our 
best and worst behaviors, and extensive research has uncovered the functions of 
its structures (e.g., the amygdala, hippocampus, septum, habenula, and 
mammillary bodies). 

There really aren’t “centers” in the brain “for” particular behaviors. This is 
particularly the case with the limbic system and emotion. There is indeed a sub¬ 
subregion of the motor cortex that approximates being the “center” for making 
your left pinkie bend; other regions have “center”-ish roles in regulating 
breathing or body temperature. But there sure aren’t centers for feeling pissy or 
horny, for feeling bittersweet nostalgia or warm protectiveness tinged with 
contempt, or for that what-is-that-thing-called-love feeling. No surprise, then, 
that the circuitry connecting various limbic structures is immensely complex. 


The Autonomic Nervous System and the Ancient Core 
Regions of the Brain 

The limbic system’s regions form complex circuits of excitation and 
inhibition. It’s easier to understand this by appreciating the deeply held desire of 
every limbic structure—to influence what the hypothalamus does. 

Why? Because of its importance. The hypothalamus, a limbic structure, is 
the interface between layers 1 and 2, between core regulatory and emotional 
parts of the brain. 

Consistent with that, the hypothalamus gets massive inputs from limbic layer 
2 structures but disproportionately sends projections to layer 1 regions. These are 
the evolutionarily ancient midbrain and brain stem, which regulate automatic 
reactions throughout the body. 

For a reptile such automatic regulation is straightforward. If muscles are 
working hard, this is sensed by neurons throughout the body that send signals up 



the spine to layer 1 regions, resulting in signals back down the spine that 
increase heart rate and blood pressure; the result is more oxygen and glucose for 
the muscles. Gorge on food, and stomach walls distend; neurons embedded there 
sense this and pass on the news, and soon blood vessels in the gut dilate, 
increasing blood flow and facilitating digestion. Too warm? Blood is sent to the 
body’s surface to dissipate heat. 


All of this is automatic, or “autonomic.” And thus the midbrain and brain-stem 
regions, along with their projections down the spine and out to the body, are 
collectively termed the “autonomic nervous system.”* 

And where does the hypothalamus come in? It’s the means by which the 
limbic system influences autonomic function, how layer 2 talks to layer 1. Have 
a full bladder with its muscle walls distended, and midbrain/brain-stem circuitry 
votes for urinating. Be exposed to something sufficiently terrifying, and limbic 
structures, via the hypothalamus, persuade the midbrain and brain stem to do the 
same. This is how emotions change bodily functions, why limbic roads 
eventually lead to the hypothalamus.* 

The autonomic nervous system has two parts—the sympathetic and 
parasympathetic nervous systems, with fairly opposite functions. 

The sympathetic nervous system (SNS) mediates the body’s response to 
arousing circumstances, for example, producing the famed “fight or flight” stress 
response. To use the feeble joke told to first-year medical students, the SNS 
mediates the “four Fs—fear, fight, flight, and sex.” Particular midbrain/brain¬ 
stem nuclei send long SNS projections down the spine and on to outposts 
throughout the body, where the axon terminals release the neurotransmitter 
norepinephrine. There’s one exception that makes the SNS more familiar. In the 
adrenal gland, instead of norepinephrine (aka noradrenaline) being released, it’s 
epinephrine (aka the famous adrenaline).* 

Meanwhile, the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS) arises from different 
midbrain/brain-stem nuclei that project down the spine to the body. In contrast to 
the SNS and the four Fs, the PNS is about calm, vegetative states. The SNS 
speeds up the heart; the PNS slows it down. The PNS promotes digestion; the 
SNS inhibits it (which makes sense—if you’re running for your life, avoiding 
being someone’s lunch, don’t waste energy digesting breakfast).* And as we will 
see chapter 14, if seeing someone in pain activates your SNS, you’re likely to be 
preoccupied with your own distress instead of helping; turn on the PNS, and it’s 




the opposite. Given that the SNS and PNS do opposite things, the PNS is 
obviously going to be releasing a different neurotransmitter from its axon 
terminals—acetylcholine.* 

There is a second, equally important way in which emotion influences the 
body. Specifically, the hypothalamus also regulates the release of many 
hormones; this is covered in chapter 4. 


So the limbic system indirectly regulates autonomic function and hormone 
release. What does this have to do with behavior? Plenty—because the 
autonomic and hormonal states of the body feed back to the brain, influencing 
behavior (typically unconsciously).* Stay tuned for more in chapters 3 and 4. 


The Interface Between the Limbic System and the 
Cortex 

Time to add the cortex. As noted, this is the brain’s upper surface (its name 
comes from the Latin cortic, meaning “tree bark”) and is the newest part of the 
brain. 

The cortex is the gleaming, logical, analytical crown jewel of layer 3. Most 
sensory information flows there to be decoded. It’s where muscles are 
commanded to move, where language is comprehended and produced, where 
memories are stored, where spatial and mathematical skills reside, where 
executive decisions are made. It floats above the limbic system, supporting 
philosophers since at least Descartes who have emphasized the dichotomy 
between thought and emotion. 

Of course, that’s all wrong, as shown by the temperature of a cup— 
something processed in the hypothalamus—altering assessment of the coldness 
of someone’s personality. Emotions filter the nature and accuracy of what is 
remembered. Stroke damage to certain cortical regions blocks the ability to 
speak; some sufferers reroute the cerebral world of speech through emotive, 
limbic detours—they can sing what they want to say. The cortex and limbic 
system are not separate, as scads of axonal projections course between the two. 
Crucially, those projections are bidirectional—the limbic system talks to the 
cortex, rather than merely being reined in by it. The false dichotomy between 
thought and feeling is presented in the classic Descartes ’ Error, by the 



neurologist Antonio Damasio of the University of Southern California; his work 
is discussed later.^ 

While the hypothalamus dwells at the interface of layers 1 and 2, it is the 
incredibly interesting frontal cortex that is the interface between layers 2 and 3. 

Key insight into the frontal cortex was provided in the 1960s by a giant of 
neuroscience, Walle Nauta of MIT.*- Nauta studied what brain regions sent 
axons to the frontal cortex and what regions got axons from it. And the frontal 
cortex was bidirectionally enmeshed with the limbic system, leading him to 
propose that the frontal cortex is a quasi member of the limbic system. Naturally, 
everyone thought him daft. The frontal cortex was the most recently evolved part 
of the very highbrow cortex—the only reason why the frontal cortex would ever 
go slumming into the limbic system would be to preach honest labor and 
Christian temperance to the urchins there. 

Naturally, Nauta was right. In different circumstances the frontal cortex and 
limbic system stimulate or inhibit each other, collaborate and coordinate, or 
bicker and work at cross-purposes. It really is an honorary member of the limbic 
system. And the interactions between the frontal cortex and (other) limbic 
structures are at the core of much of this book. 

Two more details. First, the cortex is not a smooth surface but instead is 
folded into convolutions. The convolutions form a superstructure of four 
separate lobes: the temporal, parietal, occipital, and frontal, each with different 
functions. 

Second, brains obviously have left and right sides, or “hemispheres,” that 
roughly mirror each other. 

Thus, except for the relatively few midline structures, brain regions come in 
pairs (a left and right amygdala, hippocampus, temporal lobe, and so on). 
Functions are often lateralized, such that the left and right hippocampi, for 
example, have different but related functions. The greatest lateralization occurs 
in the cortex; the left hemisphere is analytical, the right more involved in 
intuition and creativity. These contrasts have caught the public fancy, with 
cortical lateralization exaggerated by many to an absurd extent, where “left 
brain’-edness has the connotation of anal-retentive bean counting and “right 
brain’-edness is about making mandalas or singing with whales. In fact the 
functional differences between the hemispheres are generally subtle, and I’m 
mostly ignoring lateralization. 

We’re now ready to examine the brain regions most central to this book, 
namely the amygdala, the frontal cortex, and the mesolimbic/mesocortical 
dopamine system (discussion of other bit-player regions will be subsumed under 
the headings for these three). We start with the one arguably most central to our 
worst behaviors. 



THE AMYGDALA 


T he amygdala* is the archetypal limbic structure, sitting under the cortex in 
the temporal lobe. It is central to mediating aggression, along with other 
behaviors that tell us tons about aggression. 


A First Pass at the Amygdala and Aggression 

The evidence for the amygdala’s role in aggression is extensive, based on 
research approaches that will become familiar. 

First there’s the correlative “recording” approach. Stick recording electrodes 
into numerous species’ amygdalae* and see when neurons there have action 
potentials; this turns out to be when the animal is being aggressive.* In a related 
approach, determine which brain regions consume extra oxygen or glucose, or 
synthesize certain activity-related proteins, during aggression—the amygdala 
tops the list. 

Moving beyond mere correlation, if you lesion the amygdala in an animal, 
rates of aggression decline. The same occurs transiently when you temporarily 
silence the amygdala by injecting Novocain into it. Conversely, implanting 
electrodes that stimulate neurons there, or spritzing in excitatory 
neurotransmitters (stay tuned), triggers aggression.- 

Show human subjects pictures that provoke anger, and the amygdala 
activates (as shown with neuroimaging). Sticking an electrode in someone’s 
amygdala and stimulating it (as is done before certain types of neurosurgery) 
produces rage. 

The most convincing data concern rare humans with damage restricted to the 
amygdala, either due to a type of encephalitis or a congenital disorder called 
Urbach-Wiethe disease, or where the amygdala was surgically destroyed to 
control severe, drug-resistant seizures originating there.- Such individuals are 
impaired in detecting angry facial expressions (while being fine at recognizing 
other emotional states—stay tuned). 

And what does amygdala damage do to aggressive behavior? This was 
studied in humans where amygdalotomies were done not to control seizures but 


to control aggression. Such psychosurgery provoked fiery controversy in the 
1970s. And I don’t mean scientists not saying hello to each other at conferences. 

I mean a major public shit storm. 

The issue raised bioethical lightning rods: What counted as pathological 
aggression? Who decided? What other interventions had been tried 
unsuccessfully? Were some types of hyperaggressive individuals more likely to 
go under the knife than others? What constituted a cure?- 

Most of these cases concerned rare epileptics where seizure onset was 
associated with uncontrollable aggression, and where the goal was to contain 
that behavior (these papers had titles such as “Clinical and physiological effects 
of stereotaxic bilateral amygdalotomy for intractable aggression”). The fecal 
hurricane concerned the involuntary lopping out of the amygdala in people 
without epilepsy but with a history of severe aggression. Well, doing this could 
be profoundly helpful. Or Orwellian. This is a long, dark story and I will save it 
for another time. 

Did destruction of the human amygdala lessen aggression? Pretty clearly so, 
when violence was a reflexive, inchoate outburst preceding a seizure. But with 
surgery done solely to control behavior, the answer is, er, maybe—the 
heterogeneity of patients and surgical approaches, the lack of modern 
neuroimaging to pinpoint exactly which parts of the amygdala were destroyed in 
each individual, and the imprecision in the behavioral data (with papers 
reporting from 33 to 100 percent “success” rates) make things inconclusive. The 
procedure has almost entirely fallen out of practice. 

The amygdala/aggression link pops up in two notorious cases of violence. 
The first concerns Ulrike Meinhof, a founder in 1968 of the Red Army Faction 
(aka the Baader-Meinhof Gang), a terrorist group responsible for bombings and 
bank robberies in West Germany. Meinhof had a conventional earlier life as a 
journalist before becoming violently radicalized. During her 1976 murder trial, 
she was found hanged in her jail cell (suicide or murder? still unclear). In 1962 
Meinhof had had a benign brain tumor surgically removed; the 1976 autopsy 
showed that remnants of the tumor and surgical scar tissue impinged on her 
amygdala. 2 

A second case concerns Charles Whitman, the 1966 “Texas Tower” sniper 
who, after killing his wife and mother, opened fire atop a tower at the University 
of Texas in Austin, killing sixteen and wounding thirty-two, one of the first 
school massacres. Whitman was literally an Eagle Scout and childhood choirboy, 
a happily married engineering major with an IQ in the 99th percentile. In the 


prior year he had seen doctors, complaining of severe headaches and violent 
impulses (e.g., to shoot people from the campus tower). He left notes by the 
bodies of his wife and his mother, proclaiming love and puzzlement at his 
actions: “I cannot rationaly [sic] pinpoint any specific reason for [killing her],” 
and “let there be no doubt in your mind that I loved this woman with all my 
heart.” His suicide note requested an autopsy of his brain, and that any money he 
had be given to a mental health foundation. The autopsy proved his intuition 
correct—Whitman had a glioblastoma tumor pressing on his amygdala. Did 
Whitman’s tumor “cause” his violence? Probably not in a strict “amygdaloid 
tumor = murderer” sense, as he had risk factors that interacted with his 
neurological issues. Whitman grew up being beaten by his father and watching 
his mother and siblings experience the same. This choirboy Eagle Scout had 
repeatedly physically abused his wife and had been court-martialed as a Marine 
for physically threatening another soldier.* And, perhaps indicative of a thread 
mnning through the family, his brother was murdered at age twenty-four during 
a bar fight.- 


A Whole Other Domain of Amygdaloid Function to the 
Center Stage 

Thus considerable evidence implicates the amygdala in aggression. But if 
you asked amygdala experts what behavior their favorite brain structure brings 
to mind, “aggression” wouldn’t top their list. It would be fear and anxiety. 2 
Crucially, the brain region most involved in feeling afraid and anxious is most 
involved in generating aggression. 

The amygdala/fear link is based on evidence similar to that supporting the 
amygdala/aggression link.— In lab animals this has involved lesioning the 
structure, detecting activity in its neurons with “recording electrodes,” 
electrically stimulating it, or manipulating genes in it. All suggest a key role for 
the amygdala in perceiving fear-provoking stimuli and in expressing fear. 
Moreover, fear activates the amygdala in humans, with more activation 
predicting more behavioral signs of fear. 

In one study subjects in a brain scanner played a Ms. Pac-Man-from-hell 
video game where they were pursued in a maze by a dot; if caught, they’d be 
shocked.— When people were evading the dot, the amygdala was silent. 
However, its activity increased as the dot approached; the stronger the shocks, 


the farther away the dot would be when first activating the amygdala, the 
stronger the activation, and the larger the self-reported feeling of panic. 

In another study subjects waited an unknown length of time to receive a 
shock.— This lack of predictability and control was so aversive that many chose 
to receive a stronger shock immediately. And in the others the period of 
anticipatory dread increasingly activated the amygdala. 

Thus the human amygdala preferentially responds to fear-evoking stimuli, 
even stimuli so fleeting as to be below conscious detection. 

Powerful support for an amygdaloid role in fear processing comes from post- 
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In PTSD sufferers the amygdala is 
overreactive to mildly fearful stimuli and is slow in calming down after being 
activated.— Moreover, the amygdala expands in size with long-term PTSD. This 
role of stress in this expansion will be covered in chapter 4. 

The amygdala is also involved in the expression of anxiety.— Take a deck of 
cards—half are black, half are red; how much would you wager that the top card 
is red? That’s about risk. Here’s a deck of cards—at least one is black, at least 
one is red; how much would you wager that the top card is red? That’s about 
ambiguity. The circumstances carry identical probabilities, but people are made 
more anxious by the second scenario and activate the amygdala more. The 
amygdala is particularly sensitive to unsettling circumstances that are social. A 
high-ranking male rhesus monkey is in a sexual consortship with a female; in 
one condition the female is placed in another room, where the male can see her. 
In the second she’s in the other room along with a rival of the male. No surprise, 
that situation activates the amygdala. Is that about aggression or anxiety? 
Seemingly the latter—the extent of activation did not correlate with the amount 
of aggressive behaviors and vocalizations the male made, or the amount of 
testosterone secreted. Instead, it correlated with the extent of anxiety displayed 
(e.g., teeth chattering, or self-scratching). 

The amygdala is linked to social uncertainty in other ways. In one 
neuroimaging study, a subject would participate in a competitive game against a 
group of other players; outcomes were rigged so that the subject would wind up 
in the middle of the rankings.— Experimenters then manipulated game outcomes 
so that subjects’ rankings either remained stable or fluctuated wildly. Stable 
rankings activated parts of the frontal cortex that we’ll soon consider. Instability 
activated the frontal cortex plus the amygdala. Being unsure of your place is 
unsettling. 


Another study explored the neurobiology of conforming.— To simplify, a 
subject is part of a group (where, secretly, the rest are confederates); they are 
shown “X,” then asked, “What did you see?” Everyone else says “Y.” Does the 
subject lie and say “Y” also? Often. Subjects who stuck to their guns with “X” 
showed amygdala activation. 

Finally, activating specific circuits within the amygdala in mice turns anxiety 
on and off; activating others made mice unable to distinguish between safe and 
anxiety-producing settings.*— 

The amygdala also helps mediate both innate and learned fear.— The core of 
innate fear (aka a phobia) is that you don’t have to learn by trial and error that 
something is aversive. For example, a rat born in a lab, who has interacted only 
with other rats and grad students, instinctually fears and avoids the smell of cats. 
While different phobias activate somewhat different brain circuitry (for example, 
dentist phobia involves the cortex more than does snake phobia), they all 
activate the amygdala. 

Such innate fear contrasts with things we learn to fear—a bad neighborhood, 
a letter from the IRS. The dichotomy between innate and learned fear is actually 
a bit fuzzy.— Everyone knows that humans are innately afraid of snakes and 
spiders. But some people keep them as pets, give them cute names.* Instead of 
inevitable fear, we show “prepared learning”—learning to be afraid of snakes 
and spiders more readily than of pandas or beagles. 

The same occurs in other primates. For example, lab monkeys who have 
never encountered snakes (or artificial flowers) can be conditioned to fear the 
former more readily than the latter. As we’ll see in the next chapter, humans 
show prepared learning, being predisposed to be conditioned to fear people with 
a certain type of appearance. 

The fuzzy distinction between innate and learned fear maps nicely onto the 
amygdala’s structure. The evolutionarily ancient central amygdala plays a key 
role in innate fears. Surrounding it is the basolateral amygdala (BFA), which is 
more recently evolved and somewhat resembles the fancy, modern cortex. It’s 
the BFA that learns fear and then sends the news to the central amygdala. 

Joseph FeDoux at New York University has shown how the BFA learns 
fear.*— Expose a rat to an innate trigger of fear—a shock. When this 
“unconditioned stimulus” occurs, the central amygdala activates, stress 
hormones are secreted, the sympathetic nervous system mobilizes, and, as a clear 
end point, the rat freezes in place—“What was that? What do I do?” Now do 
some conditioning. Before each shock, expose the rat to a stimulus that normally 


does not evoke fear, such as a tone. And with repeated coupling of the tone (the 
conditioned stimulus) with the shock (the unconditioned one), fear conditioning 
occurs—the sound of the tone alone elicits freezing, stress hormone release, and 
so on.* 

LeDoux and others have shown how auditory information about the tone 
stimulates BLA neurons. At first, activation of those neurons is irrelevant to the 
central amygdala (whose neurons are destined to activate following the shock). 
But with repeated coupling of tone with shock, there is remapping and those 
BLA neurons acquire the means to activate the central amygdala.* 

BLA neurons that respond to the tone only once conditioning has occurred 
would also have responded if conditioning instead had been to a light. In other 
words, these neurons respond to the meaning of the stimulus, rather than to its 
specific modality. Moreover, if you electrically stimulate them, rats are easier to 
fear-condition; you’ve lowered the threshold for this association to be made. 

And if you electrically stimulate the auditory sensory input at the same time as 
shocks (i.e., there’s no tone, just activation of the pathway that normally carries 
news of the tone to the amygdala), you cause fear conditioning to a tone. You’ve 
engineered the learning of a false fear. 

There are synaptic changes as well. Once conditioning to a tone has 
occurred, the synapses coupling the BLA and central nucleus neurons have 
become more excitable; how this occurs is understood at the level of changes in 
the amount of receptors for excitatory neurotransmitters in dendritic spines in 
these circuits.* Furthermore, conditioning increases levels of “growth factors,” 
which prompt the growth of new connections between BLA and central 
amygdala neurons; some of the genes involved have even been identified. 

We’ve now got learning to be afraid under our belts.*— Now conditions 
change—the tone still occurs now and then, but no more shock. Gradually the 
conditioned fear response abates. How does “fear extinction” occur? How do we 
learn that this person wasn’t so scary after all, that different doesn’t necessarily 
equal frightening? Recall how a subset of BLA neurons respond to the tone only 
once conditioning has occurred. Another population does the opposite, 
responding to the tone once it’s no longer signaling shock (logically, the two 
populations of neurons inhibit each other). Where do these “Ohhh, the tone isn’t 
scary anymore” neurons get inputs from? The frontal cortex. When we stop 
fearing something, it isn’t because some amygdaloid neurons have lost their 
excitability. We don’t passively forget that something is scary. We actively learn 
that it isn’t anymore.* 
